# Preface
_entries of writing are inserted with the latest at the bottom.  pieces of the story won't be chronological.  I'll add them at times the memory feels clear and I can put them into words._

## 2025.05.10 Angel Definition
On several occasions in my life I was given help from an angel and in order to tell those stories I should first define what I mean by angel, so today I'll just write the definition.

An angel is an **unexpected person** who interacts with you in your real life (not in a dream or online - in your tangible space) who **helps you**, without your **expectation**, and thereby impacted your **critical path.**
* **The critical path** is the collection of moments in your life that brought you to where you are today, concerning your key life activities of your present time, and excluding exteraneous matters.
  * Example exclusion: Today I am making regular youtube videos and I show my face in most videos, which includes one dimple when I smile.  Around age 13, my sister bumped into me on a trampoline which struck my cheek and gave me that dimple.  Without that event, today would not look the same.  This is true but my odd dimple has never been crucial in any of my videos.  It is part of my path but not part of my critical path.
  * Example inclusion: Today I make regular instructions for engineering lessons, and it all roots back to my bachelors degree in mechanical engineering.  The ME degree is part of my critical path because I could not possibly make this content without such background knowledge.
* **Expectation** is an ordinary term, but I want to make this definition more specific.  Something falls outside of expectation even if you are seeking something but had failed to find it, to such a degree you accepted and set intentions to proceed in your life without it.  Alternatively, if you are in a dire situation and you cannot foresee a way to proceed without an item, we can call this a crisis and the expectation is to face a catastrophe such as loss of life or a serious reality of suffering.
* **An unexpected person** is someone who creates a situation you ultimatley did not expect.  You may know the person but not expect them to present you with a situation, or even perhaps they did not expect to present a situation for you.  Regarding the angel I am mostly referring to people who are completely unexpected - they are not known to you, they are not introduced by someone who is helping you, and they are not simply a person in a category where you sought help from the category.
  * Example Exclusion:  My fiance from Brazil needed to find a hair dresser in Missouri to make her desired hair style for the wedding.  Since she has genetics from Africa her hair is an uncommon in missouri, where the wedding was being planned.  She searched all around for a person to do her hair for her big day, without finding one.  Finally just 2 weeks before the wedding she found a small shop with a dresser that knows how to work with her hairstyle.  The result was unexpected, and a great suprise but this is excluded from "unexpected people" because she was found in the same place we searched during the same time we were searching.  So at the main level, the person was expected.
  * Example Inclusion: During an overseas flight, a person suffers from an allergic reaction and there happens to be just one person on the airplane who is an ER nurse who carries an epipen.  Of course it is no surprise to have the nurse board the plane, and no surprise for a nurse to carry an epipen, but it was unexpected for the nurse to be on this flight at the very moment of the incident and for her attention to be drawn at the moment of the crisis, in a crowded place.  Ordinarily there would be no guarantees of this situation to match up in timing and place in such a way.  (this may be a poor example if airplanes usually carry this particular equipment - use your imagination for better examples if you wish).
* **Help** should also be defined. At the moment of receiving help we may or may not be aware if it is helpful, and if it is critical (on the critical path).
  * Example Exclusion:  after a hurricane, a whole crew of helpers arrived in Haiti with food supplies.  Among the hurricane victims was a person who was nearly starving, and they received food from the crew.  Of course this is helpful but it is part of our planned emergency response so for the definition of an angel, let us exclude helpers who are operating on orders from their ordinary work policies.
  * Example Inclusion: My little brother was born with down syndrome and we raised him as a family team.  For his verbal skills, everyone in the family had to put a strong effort into annunciation.  At the time this did not seem to help me but later in life I made teams together with many foreign nationals.  The brazilians told me I was far easier to understand than the average American, which helped me immensely in doing my international business work.  In childhood it was a burden to put so much effort into speaking clearly, and later in life it was a great deal of help.

## 2023.12.07 Preface
The story of my life is something I could not imagine when I was growing up.  I was sure I was so unremarkable, like a tree in a forest of people on the planet.  And by age 34, I am realizing the reason it is remarkable is due to the interactions with other people, and the perfection of timing and essence granted to each joy and suffering that has taken place.

I messaged my mother yesterday, "this year it seems that my eyes are getting opened and my life was a book of pages, each day another turn of a page and until this moment, I only had the opportunity to read the front side of each page; the odd pages.  And now, I have been granted access to the back side, and all of the even pages appeared.  Just spending time alone, any time I am in peace I can review the old pages and begin reading the even ones in between.  

Because of this, I thought things had slowed down this year and that I could begin writing - nobody will understand my behaviors and my decisions if they don't understand my story, right?  But each time I sit down to explain in writing, a new page opens and I am again in mid-journey. 

Here is the strategy I will attempt:  I will just begin writing factual pieces, at the moments I can recall them.   I'll write the book and publish it in realtime, and make my edits in realtime.  Github (this utility online) can track every change so if you desired to know what has been edited, you can see each and every change.

I hope that if anyone is following along, they are a person of trust - it is going to be very vulnerable to begin writing without having passed it all through and editor and reviewing for mistakes.  But, it's an experiment, and I only live once so let's try it.

## 2025.04.20 Guatemala Story

As a child I hadn't traveled far from home.  I hadn't seen the ocean by age 16, with missouri double-landlocked in the middle of the USA, and distant places like coastlines and big cities felt like dreams to one day pursue.  So, just to leave the country would be the privilege of the lifetime.

By age 19 I was a sophomore in college, adapted to the student life after 1 year away from home.  I joined Engineers Without Borders which had a local chapter at my college and open invitations for engineering students to visit a monthly meeting and become a member.  It would be categorized as an extracurricular and it appealed to me because it was an opportunity to travel the world.   In my first general meeting I asked what it takes to sign up, and they suggested presently there are four project teams and the Guatemala team needs the most new members.  So, I put on my schedule to return for the next weekly Guatemala meeting.  The meetings were led by a couple of Seniors and Grad students, with most engineering experience.

--- cut to the chase? ---

This is how I tell the remarkable parts to friends who already know me.  At Grade 3, age 8, I was in geography class and was assigned one country to report on, so the class could learn about the world.  My mom brought me to the library to find books on Guatemala which I was assigned to.  I specifically recall during my work I asked my mom "How can I learn about the world if I only get to study one country?" concerned that I was missing out on all the rest of the earth.  I wondered "why was I assigned Guatemala?  What if it's not very important, and I miss the more important countries?"  I don't recall ever getting any answer.

At age 19 I took my first trip of my whole life out of the country.  I planned for months, navigated paperwork to get a passport, took precious funding out of my bank account during college, and visited the student health center for specified vaccines and prescriptions.  I followed all of the steps of this organization, EWB, with a team of young engineers to travel safely.  All of the decisions and steps were handed to me, and I had not chosen the place, the time, the translators, the vehicles, or anything.   But my destination was Nahualate, Guatemala.  It was a town so small and so poor that it did not appear on Google Earth yet and my team's goal was to perform engineering assessment.  We were in the first year of what would become an 8-year project to generate clean drinking water for 500 families who suffered from illness and death due to their contaminated drinking water.  I knew little about health, nothing about water, and nothing about the illness.  For that trip I hiked around the town with a few townspeople, a translator, two students from Mizzou in MPH (masters in public health), a group of young engineers, and lab equipment for taking GPS coordinates & water bacteria analysis.  I was nothing more than a helping hand, with too little experience to take responsibility.  

Fast forward one and a half years, and I was elected to the team leader position for this project (age 20).  Years later I would discover it was the largest project ever undertaken by the nationwide EWB organization's history.  Civil engineers from both countries, and students, put together miles of piping, a deep drilled well, a fabricated elevated water tower to withstand earthquakes, and pumps and outlets for all of the drinking water throughout an entire town across mountainous terrain.   My role became heavily administrative since I was not a civil engineer and not a spanish speaker.  I felt a little out of place but during my junior and senior years I was a crucial person on the project.   I made three more trips back to Guatemala during this time, and looking back I have no idea how I managed to keep on top of my courses, participate in dozens of fraternity events, and hold this role in EWB at the same time.   And during all this time, it had not occured to me that this was the answer to my question at age 8, when I had asked God "why do I only get assigned to learn about Guatemala?"  The answer was presented to me, but I had not noticed yet.

Fast forward once again, to my life as a full time engineer, age 30.  I had left the job at Toyota to begin grad school, I had completed my masters & married a biologist, and I was beginning my married life.  For the decade of my 20's, life was about career and it was now including my wife's career.  I had not thought about Guatemala for a long long time.  I went overseas for the most impactful trip of my life.  It was not to visit but to actually live in Malaysia.  The purpose was to support the wife beginning her career in her extreme specialization as a PhD, which took us to asia.  For many reasons the year of 2020 became the most life altering year ever, but the biggest reason was my illness.  I contracted a bacterial infection in the gut from some unknown food or water source, of hundreds of meals I could not even name in places I could not pronounce.  In Malaysia it became 6 months of very severe suffering, diahrrea, weight loss, and chaotic attempts to find out what was wrong and where it came from, and how to get better.  The symptoms developed in a chaotic and strange way, delaying diagnosis.  Having the stress of the foreign country, trying to establish life and trying to support a wife who had ended up working for corrupt & manipulative CEO's, so many of my symptoms would just match a person under extreme stress.  By the time I had a conclusive diagnosis from a pathologist, the source was e.coli.   The next 24 months would consist of further suffering from a damaged gut, further stress of getting new jobs in America and my wife's greencard, further stress of a divorce when my wife left me, and further stress of the personal financial crisis which essentially brought about the divorce.  So recovery was slow and uncertain, and draining of my spirits to the lowest I have ever been in my life. 

During 2022 and 2023 through scattered blessings very gradually, my finances became stable again.  My health became stable, I rebuilt friendships, I rebuilt connection with family, and I re-set my spiritual life.  I reconnected with the local church and I reconnected with prayer and sought closeness with my new aquaintences in BCS (bryan-college-station) Texas.  And I spent hundreds of days in solitude without friends and even without co-workers who cared to become friends.  During all of this solitude I reached a point where meditation was daily, prayer was very regular, and suddenly, my whole life started connecting. A waterfall of wisdom and revelations were flowing into my mind. A whole lifetime worth of truth came in, about my family history, about the world economy, about the engineers of today and those of Edison's days, about who I am, about my purpose in life... just unbelievable heaps of answers and truth.  Formerly, I had experiences in a dozen countries for a dozen years around the world stored as disparate threads of memories and they all connected like a burst of webbing that just interlinked every moment of my life and every question I had ever wondered.  And instead of a scrolling input of a series of answers it was like a spiral of linkages that connected every node.  For at least 100 days I discovered the most remarkable answer I had ever discovered in my life - realizations at the intensity level that a single unit would have changed my life direction, but instead of one unit arriving with time to unpack, it was daily.   This was the time I was ready to write down a biography and a book of life lessons but they kept arriving even more intensely so that every time I sat down to write I would receive a flood of thoughts that would cause my eyes to widen like "oh my gosh this is more important than what I'm writing about right now." and I would start a new topic in the begining of the unfinished one. 

And just one tiny inkling during all of this information flowing in, was the realization that the illness that changed my life and caused me years of suffering, had entered my body as a bacteria.  And this bacteria was the exact same bacteria that a decade earlier, we had worked to eliminate in Nahualate, Guatemala. It was the exact suffering which we had been working to relieve from the people as we worked to engineer a clean water system.  And with that suffering, having felt the feelings of potentially dying and fearing for my life and complete confusion about the source or the solution - this was the only way I could ever appreciate the work we did in EWB in 2010.  And this was the only way I could ever EVER come anywhere close to understanding how important that effort was.  And looking back at my motivations at age 20, it was only by a random chance that I ever signed up for the team to help.  It was completely unplanned and far outside of the things I would sign up for if it were not conveniently placed on my campus with peers recruiting me with banners and pizza.  I couldn't believe it was the same bacteria so I scoured my old files with photographs of the Guatemala trips and I found the very petri dish which was made into a measurement of the bacteria colonies that enabled us to confirm the project was necessary and proceed with the project.  And so many more details flowed in as I looked at the old photos, I could never describe them all.

Then there was even more.  A whole year after I returned to the old photos, and after I connected the dots between the e. coli in Malaysia and the e.coli in guatemala I recalled the moment in grade 3.  The moment I asked "Why am I only assigned Guatemala" and "how will I be able to learn about the whole world?"  It was the very question that I had asked, that would be answered by God and not by any person.  And the answer would come to me directly, and not from anythign written on paper.  And it would come from real life experience, undeniable, with every piece of evidence directly on my personal computer in case I couldn't believe my own memory.  I even had the scanned photograph of the medical diagnosis in 2020.  So there it is.  My life-threatening and painful illness in 2020 became a powerful event that ultimately forced me into isolation and prayer and reflection on life and death, that would then lead to wisdom that connected insignificant events spanning my whole life.  Those insignificant moments became so immensely significant.  I have been rebuilding my mindset since 2023 to humbly know that those moments we deem insignificant are often more powerful than we can imagine.  Our ability to judge the importance of a moment is a thousand times less than sufficient.  Integrating that awareness into our daily thoughts and actions yields more peace, more love, more truth than I can ever express.
